---
layout: post
title: "generalists/foxes and hedgehogs"
categories: [mental models, life]
comments: true
---

The age of the Renaissance man is over. Forget the emphasis on ‘interdisciplinary’ – it’s good to specialize. To make an impact in a given field, you have to excel at it. And to excel, you need to dig deep.

But how am I supposed to dedicate myself to one field?! I can’t bear it, the notion of being able to talk about hydrogen bonding in diols and binary diol-water systems investigated using DFT methods or something of that nature while unaware of the basic principles of other fields. I’m so averse to it that I’m quitting my practically-finished double major to avoid writing a thesis.

Does it just get too hard at a certain level? Am I afraid of or unable to meet the challenge? I don’t think that’s a major factor, though I wouldn’t be surprised if it were true. Looking at the advanced classes I’ve taken, I always find that the subject matter consists of derivation of minutiae, or that the high level is actually not so hard or meaningful (see: linguistics; my UROP) and something I would feel silly devoting time to. Though perhaps this is untrue of other subjects, in which case I’m in the wrong field.

Is it a fear of missing out? That I want to get a taste of everything: drawing, chess, astronomy, geology, literature, languages, programming, etc? This is probably closer to it. I want the big picture, and there are still so many pieces I’m missing. It’s a selfish desire (as many desires tend to be). Instead of devoting myself to the betterment of everything, I’m here, a dabbling dilettante, for unclear reasons beyond a relatively shallow(?) level of personal satisfaction.

Unfortunately, there’s not that much you can do with only this kind of diffuse thinking. People aren’t very good at being /that/ good at so many things. The cost of maintaining previously-acquired knowledge builds up quite rapidly – for instance, I’m sad to say I remember far less than one would hope from high school days, that I no longer have the same command of Spanish or German or Latin I used to, that I can’t really recall the contents of all the books I’ve read. And there are ways to maintain these skills and memories but it takes time and attention that just might not be worth devoting. So here I am, trying to collect as many bits of knowledge I can, putting them into this bucket full of holes…

Nobody needs generalists. I’m sitting here looking at the first draft of a résumé I threw together, and it’s pretty blank. I can write up a short essay without much effort. I can look at basic chess tactics, write a periodic table, recite some lines of various poems, teach introductory bio, explain fundamentals of cosmology, distinguish rock from mineral. None of /that/ goes on a résumé. The thing I’m most proud of is my ability to think, or perhaps learn (though these days I doubt that a little more). But those fail to show up on paper.

In the end, I guess I’m okay with this. I’ve accepted this is what I want, and thus do, and that these are the consequences…but I’m open to being convinced otherwise.

I mentioned extremely briefly a while back that I was going to start looking into EA, which (along with a bunch of gradual things, and a visit to CFAR) led me into rationalist stuff, which in turn prompted this whole “what do I actually want to do with my life” business. (Sidenote: my initial impressions of this undertaking were pretty wrong. I was very tempted to respond to most things I read or learned with “I know”. I did believe – and still do, to some degree – that I was aware of such rationalist concepts and already was employing them in my life, to some degree. But I was surprised to learn that I actually only knew these things on some level. A far-away, big-and-fuzzy-picture level. Keeping more ‘discrete’, detailed, specific instances in my awareness /has/, in fact, changed the way I approach and think about things a little. I think the main difference is how much more often I’m aware of it, consciously and deliberately bringing things to mind.)

So: what do I want to do?

Research & academia? Though I hadn’t consciously noticed it until quite recently, there is quite an enormous pressure to stay on this path once you’ve begun. Advisors all assume you’re doing grad school. Parents and family assume you’re doing grad school. You yourself assume you’re doing grad school. And I’m given to understand that, further down the path, a PhD. assumes you’re going to do research, that professors stay professors, etc. It really feels quite awkward to say no. But I think I can, and I think I want to, if I don’t find a new field. I am not going into physics, and experience has turned me away from astronomy and linguistics. But perhaps something else would be more fitting…

How about teaching? I had a relatively brief burst of enthusiasm for my first Life Goal/Aspiration (i.e. teaching this kind of stuff, and teaching well in general), but looking at the available summer opportunities and career path details has dampened my enthusiasm – at least a little. There seems to be a large focus on closing the achievement gap across available summer programs – and of course this isn’t an ignoble goal or anything, but that focus is not what I had in mind. Furthermore, I’d have to go through what sounds awfully similar to a high school curriculum as one criterion for teacher accreditation, which frankly sounds like a waste of time. I’m not discounting the possibility at all, but it does make me wonder if I should consider more options.

While musing about such things, I came across the site 80,000 hours, which in broadest terms is about choosing a good career. They parametrize ‘good’ in various ways, including positive impact on the world. (They also argue that “a bit of self-reflection [re: choosing the career you ‘want’] is useful, but it only goes so far, because we’re good at deceiving ourselves. We’re bad at predicting what will make us most happy, and we don’t even realize how bad we are. We’re even bad at remembering how satisfying different experiences were.” [For instance, the peak-end rule.] This motivates their use of other metrics for determining what ‘good’ means.)

(Sidenote: I also found this bit interesting, though it doesn’t directly relate to the matter at hand. “Of [social programs] that have been rigorously evaluated, most (perhaps 75% or more), including those backed by expert opinion and less-rigorous studies, turn out to produce small or no effects, and, in some cases negative effects. This suggests that if you chose a random government or charity program to get involved in, there’s a decent chance that you’ll have no impact.”)

After reading the site for a bit, two questions were most salient to me: what are the big problems I could work on? and what kind of job would I be good at?

They provide a list of big problems, a surprising proportion of which I didn’t expect to be there.  I had not, for instance, considered working on meat substitutes. I’d always assumed that would be a thing that happened in the future – chicken thighs being grown in labs, without bones interspersed or the need for mass-slaughter or all the resources farming requires (producing 14.5% of global greenhouse gas emissions!)…but I guess there aren’t actually that many people working on it. Still, none of them seem like obvious choices, though I’ll still keep some in the back of my head.

And what am I good at? It occasionally feels like the position I’m most cut out for is someone’s secretary, or perhaps a manager of something. Organizing calendars, wording emails, getting small stupid things done. This sounds boring, but the ability to deal with bureaucratic procedures and get small but relevant tasks done is still important, I suppose. There’s something to be said for high-impact management here. Again, something to consider in passing.

…and then I’m a few hours deep and getting suggestions to get an econ PhD or  join a thinktank and I just want to yell at my screen please stop I don’t want to commit to changing the world I’m just thinking about trying it please leave me alone I didn’t adopt the doctrine of wanting to maximize my impact yet give me some more time more space please…

What else could change the world? What makes the world a better place?

If you look at the history of ideas, the history of the human race, in every single generation there have been huge moral atrocities that have been committed by the people of that generation that at the time just seemed completely normal. 

For example, Aristotle spent his entire life dedicated to thinking about how to lead an ethical life, and it just didn’t occur to him that keeping slaves was wrong. That’s a pretty astonishing fact. He was one of the smartest people in the world at the time, spent all his time thinking about this, and was still oblivious.

But when we look at the history of atrocities like slavery, the deplorable treatment of foreigners, the subjugation of women, the persecution of people who aren’t heterosexual, the persecution of animals today, what we see over and over again is how easy it is for people to be oblivious to serious moral problems.

It seems unlikely, so the argument goes, that this would just happen to be the special golden age of tolerance, an era when we’ve finally figured everything out. What sorts of major moral problems will we shake our heads at centuries from now? Is it something we can figure out? In general, these trends are all about expanding the moral sphere of concern. What sentient beings are being ignored? Should we use sentience to determine the scope of moral consideration or should we use some other criteria? Do we need to care about other mammals more? Insects? Plants??

I don’t think there’s a huge problem until xenobiology (especially sentient xenobiology, though deciding the meaning of sentience is a problem in of itself) arises. I draw my line of compassion at sentience, and shrug noncommitally at the suffering of other living things (be they mammals or plants). This is, you know, probably not the greatest. There’s this nice passage in a book Ishmael about evolution. If we were like the jellyfish (we are), we’d think we’re the peak of existence, that the other organisms are somehow ‘less evolved’ than we are; that we should control how things evolve and in what ways based on the environments we give them (e.g. breeding of dogs, artificial selection of crops). We’re at the top of the food chain, so we control the things below us. We’re not giving other  species much chance to evolve into our superiors; by limiting their potential for sentience, we’re not being good.

I think this is a valid perspective, but not one that I subscribe to. So be it. I find it neither objectively good or bad that we do so. Natural selection & basic survival skills would suggest that we continue as we are. Still, we – humanity – could grow past such basic instincts…

But I think we largely get the idea now, at least so far as humans (sentience-as-we-know-it) are concerned. This “golden age of tolerance” might have had its onset with the rise of global interconnectivity. I think we do get the big picture of compassion, and that we understand that these are the right things to do. I doubt we’re neglecting a group based on an arbitrary characteristic like we have in the past (e.g. sex or the color of skin) – at least, in theory. Instead, I think the problem – our barbarianism – lies in how we fail to act on those principles. People raised in the modern education system probably know they’re supposed to treat all people equally. But this is not spread to all parts of the world, and it isn’t necessarily believed/enacted on a personal level. Even though experts in the field of ethics know this (unlike Aristotle), the reality remains that calling this a golden age of tolerance and compassion and equality would be absurd. The disparity between theory and practice is huge. We know it’s wrong to discriminate, but that doesn’t mean discrimination ceases to exist. We agree that in theory, it’d be nice to have peace around the world. But even when genocides are occurring today, how many of us lift a finger to do something about it?

On a different note, we could also afford have more compassion on a personal level, i.e. be nicer people. To give help when someone asks for help; to not watch as bystanders when our neighbors fall into times of hardship; to ask ‘are you okay?’ with genuine concern. This kind of altruism may not be instinctively human, but it is humane.

Speaking of spheres of moral concern…voting is a concept that’s been on the back burner for a couple of months. I used to be vehemently against the idea. What’s it going to do? I find some arguments extremely unconvincing. People died for this right. You’re lucky enough to be born with this right; how could you let it go to waste?! The idea of this right that I must exercise and is some kind of inborn duty is a little absurd…

But I fear I was living in my echo chamber on this one. I didn’t hear the arguments for voting that were convincing, and I left it at that. I certainly didn’t bother to actively think of arguments for the other side, or seek them out. I was content to say, “I don’t believe it’ll have an impact. The government is relatively ineffective. And what’s one vote going to do?”

It was pointed out to me that those are two different points. If, I was asked, there was a vote to kill me and everyone I cared about, would I go vote? If I believed what I said without qualms, I shouldn’t hesitate to say no. Of course, the question in actuality gave me pause.

Now extend that sphere of moral concern. If there was a vote to kill someone else? What about a vote to deny someone else education? Or to prevent someone from doing something they want in general? Or to enact a measure that’ll cost someone their job?

My argument switched to the practicality of things. If I lived in a swing state, I would consider voting more seriously. If the system were by popular vote, I would consider voting more seriously. At the local level, I would consider voting more seriously. (Sidenote: the aforementioned 80,000 hours actually wrote a piece that seems to agree with this conclusion; my voting-adamant friend has also, after a few months, come to agree with me on these modified terms.)

The election happened recently. I watched media sensationalism. I watched sites call the results for states with 0% of the votes counted. I watched discrepancies in confidence of 50%+ between different sites. I watched as people reeled in shock when a silent, unpolled, dissatisfied population decided to show up and advocate for change. I watched people despair.

Am I that concerned with the outcome? Not really. I consider this an interesting datum in what noticeable effects the presidency has, how unpredictable polls are, and other things that affect my conception of how our government works. Today, people seemed to have calmed down. Even though I admit I’m concerned about climate change, which transcends politics and other subjective debates, the numbers suggest it wont’ be awful (or, much more awful than it already is). Perhaps I could afford to care a little more about parties that will feel the impact of these results more than I will. I have a pretty small sphere of moral concern – and I’m sorry to admit I’m not convinced that’s a terrible thing.

All that said, it’s perhaps surprising that I changed my viewpoint on voting at all. A lot of beliefs and habits that were ingrained at a younger age just kind of…stick.

I was just explaining to a friend of mine how, when eating bread and drinking water, the bread in your stomach absorbs the water in, thus increasing in volume and making you feel fuller. I had heard this countless times from my mom, so as to learn the lesson not to eat too much bread before the main dishes came at restaurants. As the words came out of my mouth, I knew I had reason to start doubting this.

In general, though, once these habits/opinions/beliefs form, people tend to be resistant to changing them. I know I am. And the worst part is how unaware I am of sticking to these irrationalities when confronted with opposing evidence. It took me a few months to properly edit my view on voting. In how many other ways am I misguided? It’s hard to notice our own habits, to make meaningful and constructive observations about ourselves.

(Sidenote: I’ve also learned that I have some physical tics, only thanks to someone occasionally imitating me for fun. Without that, though, I really would have just proceeded entirely unaware.)

I should really like an ever-present mirror in front of me at all times. Not just to see my physical tics, not literally a floating mirror – just…to be aware of my own habits and see them from a third-person point of view. For who among us hasn’t turned a blind eye to our own faults, on purpose or otherwise? How often do we stop to seriously contemplate something that contradicts what we’d like to believe? Tolerance is hard. Changing our worldview is hard. It’s said you never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view, until you climb into his skin and walk around in it. But doing that – truly removing yourself from what you know, and think, and feel – only to fully absorb a different perspective – is one of the hardest things to do.

