---
layout: post
title: "Risk Aversion"
categories: [thoughts, life]
comments: true
---

I hate risk. I fear it. Beyond the swimming-with-fish and sharp edges handled by not-me, beyond dropping-small-things-from-high-places, I fear paralysis and expectation. Not in a phobic instinctive way that makes my gut drop and gets my sympathetic system fired up like those other (oddly specific?) things, but in a fear-of-a-greater-concept sort of way, like others’ fear of death or something.

Paralysis (in the sense of inaction) has been a large theme in my life. Sometimes, it seems like a bunch of little – truly insignificant – things. For instance, there was a game of mafia going on, schoolwide or between some dorms, I can’t really recall. My friend had told me about it, that she was participating, that she wouldn’t go find her lost groceries lest she be killed on the way. I had accompanied her around in the half-hour before class to keep her safe, on the lookout for anyone approaching. I even elicited the information that the participants’ schedules were known, and suggested it would be easy for someone to walk in during lab, when no professors were present, and finish her. So as I was wrapping up that day and saw someone enter the room – a room that nobody ever entered at the 15:00 mark, save on this day – why, then, couldn’t I just say my friend’s name? A quick warning, anything. Stand between my friend and this stranger? It wouldn’t have taken much. But I was quite paralyzed by indecision for an essential many seconds (‘many’ apparently being more than ‘several’…) and she was killed. Not my fault, she would’ve said – because she didn’t even know I was watching. I left the room and was relatively distraught for the rest of the day.

Why can’t I just buzz? Or even, to a lesser but still extremely relevant degree, why can’t I speak my mind in a more casual setting? Science bowl was the world to me. (Exaggeration, but again, not by too much.) These people, these teammates – these friends – deserved to go to nationals, and I could’ve made it happen had I played the game. I wrote in my college essays – the one for MIT, I think – about how I realized my inaction was more harmful than dozens of wrong answers, and that risks were necessary. But I’ve not done anything about it.

What’s wrong with me – nothing – everything – some things, sometimes – ah, sometimes my haviour has me feeling like a petulant child. I shouldn’t have to remind myself of these things. I guess in the end it’s just me being extremely risk-averse. Can’t I change that? Won’t I? Am I even trying?

I was going to write a separate piece upon finishing my first nonfiction book in quite a while (read: basically ever, certainly the first I’ve picked up of my own volition), but it seems a bit artificial to do that, and/or something that doesn’t quite belong here. But I did enjoy it a good bit, and though the ideas were generally not groundbreaking (mindbreaking?) to me, it was nice to have them laid out, and to refresh the vocabulary needed to express them. Incidentally, I’d recommend Thinking, Fast and Slow to most anyone.

There were a few points that struck me more than others: z.B., that self-estimated contributions add up to more than 100%; events that affect the self come to mind more easily. Everyone will think they’re doing more than their part even if it’s equal split. That apparently people judge “high intelligence, although lacking in true creativity” with “a need for order and clarity, and for neat and tidy systems” and produces “dull and mechanical” writing to be the picturesque 1) computer scientist and 2) engineer – not my intuition at all. Both of these were just perspective things to keep in mind, and not really the point of the book but – back to the point, what point, whatever I was talking about…

Another example: Paul owns shares in company A and during the past year he considered switching to B, but decided against it. He would’ve been better off had he switched (by $1,200). George owns shares in B, but switches to A. He, too, would’ve been better off by the same amount had he not switched. Who feels greater regret? 92% say George – and I certainly disagree. I would be glad to finally make a choice, even if it ended badly. Or so I tell myself.

Back to my other fear: expectation, which is still really just risk-averseness in another guise.

Reading Ranger’s Apprentice so many years ago, there was a bit about Halt’s philosophy that I smiled upon reading. It was the first time I heard what I do put into words, or even an approximation of it. Something about a superstition where I can’t say what I think is going to happen when I want it to happen, lest it all fall through. It’s somewhat less a superstition and more a defensive mechanism for me, I think. But it is nonetheless true that I have a much easier time believing the worst than the best. My greatest hopes are the very things I can never believe when they occur.

Desiring something is perhaps the most risky endeavor of all. As soon as you want it, you’ve gone and sutured your happiness to it, any separation causes some lacerating injury. The feelings that hurt most, the emotions that sting most, are those that are absurd – a longing for impossible things, precisely because they are impossible; nostalgia for what never was; the desire for what could have been; the regret for what is…Having faith and trust requires courage, the ability to take a risk, the readiness even to accept pain and disappointment. Insisting on safety and security as primary conditions of life is incompatible with this… There’s a need for courage, the courage to judge certain values as of ultimate concern – and to take the jump and to stake everything on these values, to hope it doesn’t all just fall apart…

I often talk about “when we lose” when I hope we’ll win – not even allowing for ifs on the matter; “when I get a B” when I hope I’ll get an A. These hopes aren’t even impossible ones – I know there’s a possibility of their coming true, and that’s the most terrifying part.

So life’s a story. The peak-end effect, duration neglect – there’s no stopping it, beyond a mild awareness. The question, “How much pleasure do you get from your car?” is substituted with “how much pleasure do you get about your car when you think about your car?” The readiness is all? Nay, the mindfulness. And I worry none of us live mindfully enough. And that there’s nothing to be done about it. I hope I miss it when it’s gone.

