---
layout: post
title: "Why I majored in Physics"
categories: [life]
comments: true
---
I am a physics major. The reasoning for this isn’t very well-developed, but I am not regretting or reconsidering my choice. It just goes something like: I enjoy science, but loathe finding myself illiterate in one of its major subdivisions. Thus, I choose to study physics (and in doing the flexible major, cover the basics of its many subfields: mechanics, E&M, optics(?), quantum, statmech, lab).

One could argue, well, you don’t know ochem (This is somewhat valid and I may endeavour to change that, or would have, but now perhaps it grows late. I know I still have time to, but doubt that I will.) or much of molecular bio (True, but I do feel I’ve a decent grasp of bio at an introductory college level, so this is less valid to me). But even then, the validity of such criticisms doesn’t really perturb me; do I seek to be consistent or need to justify these things, even to myself?

Do I like physics? Have I learned physics?

Physics is hard. It’s a lot of, getting a pset back with a grade like 70something (when a 50something or lower was probably deserved) while watching everyone else get 100s or at least 90s (histograms on Stellar – er, learning-modules – can confirm this; it’s not my confirmation bias). It’s a lot of waving my hand around and what I feel like is bsing/bluffing my way through a problem. I couldn’t tell you the formula for capacitance (I wish I took 8.02 as well as 8.022). But is it worthwhile?

I think so. Working through these problems at least makes me aware of my (very acute) limitations. I’ve to learn that I can do better if I put in more effort – that concept, of being agentive in my future, is still somewhat foreign to me.

What would I prefer to major in? A trickier question, for certain. Going chronologically, I didn’t really decide until sometime in late high school. I realized chem was not that interesting to me, and felt somewhat ‘solved’ (I’m sure this is perfectly unfair to all the chemists), impressions I picked up in science bowl (as it was my focus) and AP chemistry (again, probably unfair). Biology always felt somewhat silly (at least at the high school level – I’m aware that’s very different from ), and the understanding that comes from memorization is interesting to teach, but not to major in. It’s also a bit (at risk of sounding too elitist) …applied.

I asked T., what he was thinking of majoring in, and at the time of course I looked up to him very much (not that I don’t anymore – though now it’s more at him, as opposed to up to). He told me astronomy, and I was pretty amazed; for some reason, I hadn’t thought that was truly an option for people, a thing that people went out and actually did. From there, + an SSP professor’s recommendation, I decided to go with physics, checking off course 8 with mild disbelief on my own part. Coming into MIT, I also picked up the notion of going into linguistics, despite never having taken a course in it. And this year (sophomore), I realized it’s definitely more of a minor- or concentration- level hobby than a major, opting to currently pursue EAPS concurrently instead. And within EAPS? I’ve expected myself to go into planetary. But, in all honesty? I definitely like geology more. A shame, really.

Now onto the untouched possibilities. At MIT, everyone is a math major. This is blatantly false, but math is the next thing to be discussed (with myself, in my head, once again at some mild length). It is so elegant, and so entirely unlike what I imagined. I had not before tried to. But everyone I know is so accomplished in this field, and having seen D. struggle through a more abstract math course I got a glimpse into the kinds of things they do, and I watch the ease with which they (or maybe the people I know are just really smart) solve these problems…I feel like math teaches problem solving even more so than physics (well duh[?]), so it’s not even that they’re naturally smarter. They’ve just developed this intuition that I feel so lacking in, that I do not believe I could just start learning now. In some parallel universe, I’d’ve loved to have done this. But my poor brain is perhaps not up to the challenge this time around. I look on them all with admiration, awe, and some amount of quiet jealousy.

In this universe, then, what would I major in if it were all the same to anyone? That is, where do my passions lie, if indeed I have any? Geology? perhaps, but I think there’s a more obvious answer still: literature.

What, you say, I say, not STEM?! And indeed this is my reaction on some level. And maybe, like my fondness for geology, it is only that I have not tried taking multiple courses in it yet, and would soon tire of it. For I enjoy variety. But I do wish I took more lit, and it is probably the thing I enjoy doing most, subject wise, reading, thinking, writing on those thoughts. That said, I’d still happily elect to take geology, some astronomy, some physics, ochem, and various languages (possibly ancient Greek, unlikely Russian, likely Japanese, ideally Spanish/Chinese/German/Latin refreshers, never French or Portuguese). But alas, ’twas never to be.
