---
layout: post
title: "Hedonic Treadmill"
Excerpt: getting rich slowly
categories: [thoughts, life]
comments: true
---
If you’ve ever played cookie clicker, well… firstly, don’t waste your time like that. And secondly, you’ll know how at first, you started at 0. You were working hard just to get to 10 or 100. Ten minutes later, you were impatiently waiting for 1,000 or 10,000, and at the end of the day watching the digits hit 1 billion didn’t feel so different from hitting 100,000.

We’re not the greatest with orders of magnitude; our baselines for reference gradually shift. Major change on an absolute level tends not to have much of an effect, if it happens slowly enough.

I remember being asked so many times while growing up, do you want anything? I remember feeling like if I expressed a desire for something, no matter how useless or expensive it was, I would get it. In response to this environment, I conditioned myself to never admit I wanted anything. I had read countless books featuring spoiled rich kids. I can’t say this was the reason for my behavior, but I suspect it played at least some role. These brats could be redeemed, sometimes – though it was pretty rare. I probably didn’t want to become that.

I could have anything I wanted, and led a pretty affluent lifestyle (though the choice was more my parents’ than mine) – but I never had an allowance. Even our yearly 紅包錢 was thrown into “savings” that I never saw. (I’m pretty sure my mom just put it in her account.) It was simply, ask, and you shall receive.

I remember sneaking a quarter every day from my lunch money so that I could buy a cookie at recess every other day. A dollar seemed like quite a bit of money – not in an absolute sense, but a dollar that was /mine/. Granted, it came directly from my parents, but…there was something about buying it on my own, the act of purchasing, that felt different.(?) Friends would talk about what they should buy their family and friends for the holidays, and I wondered how I could ever buy something in an actual store without my parents’ knowledge.

In high school there were days of storing up all my lunch money and eating snacks when I got home. I kept the money in a box meant for index cards. Tens of dollars saved up at a time for a group gift of an iPod Touch. I hit a hundred at some point. I could purchase things via my friends (for my other friends). I was earning a little from peer tutoring for the district. My mom opened a savings account for me, but /she/ was the one who managed it. She supposedly put what I earned there, but I had no access. And even if I did, all my spending would be visible to her.

And then I was sent off to college across the country. Huh. So this is what freedom feels like…freedom involving thousands(!) of dollars given to me at a time…freedom involving calling my family every night…

This wouldn’t do. I needed to buy (bi)weekly bus tickets, which added up pretty quickly. So I got a job. In fact, I got four. And I opened my first (secret) bank account. Direct deposit allowed me to siphon off a few percent into my own account each week, so my parents saw money go into the joint account (as they knew I was spending time working). But they were never careful about doing the math. I was averaging around $50 a week.

Eventually my earnings outweighed the cost of tickets. I hit a hundred. Then a thousand. It wasn’t strictly saving – I bought myself things for the first time. A pen. A keyboard. A shirt. Another pen. And as the need for bus tickets disappeared, I started earning a little more. I did wonder why I was working, when I was here to learn. I questioned whether it was inefficient – for instance, if I had tried to save dollars in fifth grade, they would amount to very little now. My earning power will probably increase, so that all my hard work in college amounts to little.

But I set a goal. I would work to have a savings fund in the future – that’s all. I hear a cushion of 10-15K is reasonable, even in ‘the real world’, so that was my goal: have a little pile of money in case of emergencies, a non-trivial pile I wouldn’t otherwise have if not for the time spent in college. This is also important to me because my future, with respect to finances, is very unclear. My parents kind of avoid this topic, but I know they will bequeath none of their money to me. They also have suggested that they will pay for my college, but not much beyond that – in other words, I have no idea when the flow of thousands of dollars will come to a halt. On the flip side, I eventually realized I didn’t like some of my jobs, so this semester, I quit all but the trivially easy/worthwhile jobs. To counter the fewer hours, I told my parents I stopped working altogether, and just put all the money in my savings account. (For reference, I probably average around $100 a week.)

As of this week, I hit ten thousand. Maybe it’s not something to be that proud of: siphoning money into a secret account, wasting precious time in this phase of life to scrounge up a few dollars here and there. But I think, with some (but not too great) degree of confidence, that it was a worthwhile journey. Being mildly financially independent helped me develop a more general independence. (I know I still have steps to take, like opening/maxing out a Roth IRA…but it’s a start.) I’ve learned about how silly some (most) working environments are. I’ve experienced ‘lifestyle inflation’ and hope to be more aware of it (and largely avoid it) in the future. And I’ve grown to believe that I’ll (likely) be able to get by if all else fails, even given that life is full of surprises.


Recently, I’ve found that using the trackpad is a lot less enjoyable than it used to be. This perhaps doesn’t seem very notable (and indeed isn’t). But unlike many people, who seem to think it’s some bane of their existence (or at least a very large inconvenience), I used to like it very much. I actually enjoy(ed) the location and convenience of it (+ multitouch gestures!) as well as the native keyboard (despite my love of the mechanical, and this isn’t past tense). But I got converted to a mouse (a Logitech G100, as fancy as I need it to be) and am not very able to go back. The tracking and speed of my mouse makes it feel more like an extension of my arm/hand, and the trackpad can only feel imprecise and somewhat clumsy (though yes, still the multitouch gestures, of course).

The hedonic treadmill is a philosophical concept, one of habituation – that people will get used to their circumstances, and be more or less equally happy as the person they were before the change, still unsatisfied or what have you. Or so is my general understanding of the concept. I think I disagree with it, at least on a personal level. Or, I think I think I disagree with it. I’m not perfectly sure – on one hand, I do not feel I tire of my circumstances. I enjoy my little lightbulbs, moments of wonder. When I learn how to determine the last card in a game of Set without looking. Watching the stars in my binoculars. Looking up at MIT ceilings (which apparently makes me look like a tourist). Hugging a very cute substitute (Substitute?).

But I suppose in the end, the concept doesn’t require one be dissatisfied. It just says that, give me a mechanical keyboard or something, and in some amount of time I’ll be just as happy as I was pre-keyboard. (And if I’m misconstruing the meaning of the thing entirely, sorry – I mean to discuss this concept, regardless of whether my jargon is proper.) And this is somewhat true, because I’m always somewhat content. This hasn’t changed. But I think my set point for happiness has gone up, and I’ve certainly undergone a non-negligible amount of [attempted] change.

I bought myself a mechanical keyboard. I gave someone reason to break up with me, or, I broke up with someone. I moved dorms. I said things contingent upon my own thoughts and feelings, as opposed to others which were in conflict. I got myself a second mechanical keyboard. I tried to write a/some puzzles. I made my own summer plans. It is at once a happiness I never could have imagined or conceived for myself, a path I could not imagine choosing – and the one that I think has me happiest, or at the very least, gives me great joy, one also beyond what I could ever have expected. And though I worry about whether I have lost all altruistic tendencies, I suppose that worry’s very existence is some comfort, good enough for now, that I am not entirely some selfish monster.

Tangentially, continuing on this quasi-random? or, undirected, thought train, I found that I finally(?) understand why I stop working in the middle of an examination. I think it’s not unlike how I start blog posts and never bring them to completion if I don’t write as I think. Once the speed of my thinking exceeds the spoken word – it’s akin to why I cannot always express myself coherently and break off various sentences N times in a row. It’s done in my head, or something like that, and I don’t have much will to continue.

Well-read//well-spoken. Moving via Lyft to summer housing, the driver struck up a conversation with my fellow passenger, who spoke of math (just describing non-Euclidian geometry, the existence of number theory, etc.). And it was commented upon that he was very “well-spoken”. That’s something I’ve never heard about myself. Well-read, sure. My writing sometimes well-written. But well-spoken? No, I cut myself off too much, or say nothing at all. Too much at either extreme by far.

And another dichotomy: commitment//noncommittal. Why make a weak statement when a strong one will work, says linguistics/pragmatics. Well, why make a strong statement when a weak one will do? No need to go too far – though I suppose this makes me seem aloof. Back to being well-spoken. Half a decent conversationalist. To have my thoughts be formed in not a very interesting syntactic/dictional way, but to be clear and precise. Is this what I want? Not particularly…but to have that skill would be good, I suppose. When necessary. In a professional sense, I guess.

Quitting while ahead//perseverance. Making plans//sticking to plans. Order and planning//spontaneity. I think it is nice, to be so full of specious contradiction. Categories (heuristics) are nice, but limiting; no sense in pigeonholing oneself.

Advice that’s been given to me the past semester: Speak up for yourself. Do what makes you feel happy. Don’t underestimate the happiness you can bring other people. (??? Who would think I do that…was the opposite not my problem?) Don’t feed (kidding).

Directions I want to go from here, in a general sense beyond a summer checklist: well-spoken, I suppose. Or the ability to. Just like you want to be able to play defensively and aggressively, even if you have a clear preference for one style. A slightly better focus/ability to start work or manage time, though this has improved since last year. Maybe even some semblance of physical fitness? for health reasons. This would include things like not trying to optimize walking paths -> get more exercise, no being too lazy to walk somewhere, etc. Or really, just take better care of this mortal coil in general. Figure out the balance between addressing my wants vs. others’. Want to learn. And atop all of these, also: follow through. Actions speak louder than words, and all that stuff.

Usually I don’t even set goals, because I’ve been static. Unchanging. Now I guess I’ve decided it’s time to move on, at least a little bit. Maybe I’ll end up walking in a big (or small) circle. That’ll be fine. But it seems I’ve come to the conclusion that I can improve – and that may sound thoroughly narcisisstic, but I mean only that in the past, I was happy with who I was. This has changed, though I’m not unhappy either. But I do think aiming for these things would be nice, regardless of the outcome. So why not try?

